---
layout: post
author: Harika kanthi
title: About Data Science
date: 2020-10-10T04:18:27.923Z
thumbnail: /assets/img/posts/web-3706562_1280.jpg
category: Data science
summary: Basic idea of Data science
---
**What is Data science?**

Data science can be referred to as that which helps us extract insights from data by using various techniques such as statistics, machine learning etc.

It helps us understand different patterns in the data.

It is a combination of data analysis, statistics, predictive analytics.

It allows us to extract knowledge from any kind of data and helps us give practical solutions to a business problem by translating into a research project.

**What is science in data science?**

The statistical tools that we use in the process is called data science.

It helps us evaluate the findings that we are able to uncover by during the data science process.

**Why Data science?**

Today like we can see it is a world that generates data with every single transaction made.

With the world of data and with the right tools we can always use them efficiently.

e.g. we can analyse the data to find the customers who are loyal to us.

With the knowledge we can always make better and faster decisions

**Data science components?**

* Statistics : Most critical unit, we can collect and analyse numerical data in large quantities to get useful insights
* Visualisation : easy to understand
* Machine Learning : Build and study the algorithms for predicting unseen data
* Deep Learning : A part of machine learning which is advanced technique to find patterns in data

**Data science process?**

1. Business problem
2. Data collection
3. Data preparation
4. Model planning
5. Model building
6. Model deployment
7. Communication

**Data science applications?**

* Recommendation systems
* Fraud detection
* Speech recognition
* Healthcare
* Face recognition
* Fingerprint recognition
* Targeted advertisements
* Spam filtering

e.g. recent update on Microsoft was using ds to find out the operating system and suggested the new release for those who are eligible for it

**Data science challenges?**

* Data or information with a high variety is required for accurate analysis
* Unavailability or difficulty in data access
* Privacy issues
* Domain experts
* Explanation can be difficult

**Data science tools?**

Python, R , SAS, SQL, MATLAB, etc.

**Difference between ML, Stats, DS, AI, DL ?**

**Artificial Intelligence:**

Also called as machine intelligence is the intelligence that the machine shows.

The machine performing tasks resembling the humans is called AI.

e.g. robots, Siri, etc.

**Machine Learning:**

It is like a foundation of Artificial Intelligence

We can perform a task like image recognition, fraud detections etc.

**Deep Learning:**

It is one of the approaches to ML

It uses the concept of neural networks where it builds layers in a network and makes intelligent decisions

**Data science :**

A broader field that includes everything including AI, ML, DL where we can gain insights and make predictions from the data.