---
layout: post
author: Harika kanthi
title: Plots used to understand Data
date: 2020-10-10T04:45:15.564Z
thumbnail: /assets/img/posts/data-3314284_640.png
category: Data Science
summary: "Plots "
---
<!--StartFragment-->

**Histograms:**

The distribution of numerical data is called the histogram.

X axis is the interval or values while y axis is the frequency of that particular value or interval.



**Bar plots:**

The distribution of categorical data is called bar plots.

X axis is the categories and y axis is the frequency of that category



**Box plots:**

The plot is called box and whisker plots.

These plots show us the 5 number summary.

It shows us the median, range, minimum, maximum, inter quartile range

It shows us what are the extreme values according the inter quartile range.

It is one of the methods to view the outliers.





**Scatter plots:**

A plot of numerical values against numerical values.

It helps us the understand the relationship between two numerical variables.





**Pie charts:**

Pie chart is the distribution of a categorical feature in terms of percentages of the total observations.

It is a circular plot.

100% is 360 degrees in a pie chart.





**Line chart:**

The plot that shows frequency along a line.





**Violin plot:**

Helps plot numerical data and is a combination of box plot and kernel density plot.



**Kernel density plot:**

A smooth curve estimating probability density function of a numerical variable distribution.

It calculates probabilities at each interval or value in the histogram and plots them.

<!--EndFragment-->